# Introduction and objectives

Welcome to the webpage of the course "Cyber-Physical Computation", edition
2023/2024.

Cyber-physical systems are networks of computational devices that closely
interact with physical processes in order to reach a prescribed goal; for
example a desired velocity, a desired temperature or, more generally, a desired
energy level. They range from small medical devices, such as pacemakers and
insulin pumps, to networks of autonomous vehicles and district-wide smart
grids. This course is devoted to such systems.

The main learning goal is two-fold: 1) to prepare the student to a
*disciplined* way of developing and analysing cyber-physical systems,
by presenting their *basic principles*, adequate *models of
computation*, and respective *tools*; 2) and to introduce the student
to the main limitations of the area's state-of-the-art 
-- via pedagogical illustrations extracted from real world-scenarios
involving e.g. cruise controllers, sampling algorithms, and timed
variants of concurrent algorithms.

At the end of the module, the student will:

+ know the basic principles and representative models of
  cyber-physical computation;
+ have a broad knowledge of languages, tools, and techniques for
  engineering cyber-physical systems;
+ be proficient with the tools [Uppaal]([http://www.uppaal.org/]) and [Lince]([http://arcatools.org/assets/index.html#arcatools]), which cover model
  checking, testing, and simulation for cyber-physical systems;
+ be able to understand in which ways the state-of-the-art (of
  cyber-physical computation and engineering) is limited, and 
  the potential outcomes of solving these limitations.

# Syllabus

+ Labelled transition systems, their role as semantic objects, and
  corresponding notions of equivalence;
+ Timed labelled transition systems and corresponding notions of
  equivalence, composition, and synchronisation. Zeno behaviour;
+ From theory to practice: the tool [Uppaal]([http://www.uppaal.org/]);
+ A while-language and its operational semantics;
+ A hybrid while-language and its operational semantics;
+ From theory to practice: the tool [Lince]([http://arcatools.org/assets/index.html#arcatools]);
+ Cyber-physical behaviour as yet another computational effect: the
  notion of a monad, the hybrid monad, and monad combination.
  
# Summaries

  - __05 feb. 2023__ – Introduction to the module and its dynamics ([slides](introSlides/intro.pdf))

# Assessment

Assessment consist of the following items:

+ Two individual sets of exercises to do at home (30%). 
+ Two group assignments (70%);
  
# Bibliography

<p><a name="alur1994theory"></a>
Rajeev Alur and David&nbsp;L Dill.
 A theory of timed automata.
 <em>Theoretical computer science</em>, 126(2):183--235, 1994.
[&nbsp;<a href="bib/biblioCPC_bib.html#alur1994theory">bib</a>&nbsp;]
</p>

<p><a name="henzinger2000theory"></a>
Thomas&nbsp;A Henzinger.
 The theory of hybrid automata.
 In <em>Verification of digital and hybrid systems</em>, pages 265--292.
  Springer, 2000.
[&nbsp;<a href="bib/biblioCPC_bib.html#henzinger2000theory">bib</a>&nbsp;]
</p>

<p><a name="winskel1993formal"></a>
Glynn Winskel.
 <em>The formal semantics of programming languages: an introduction</em>.
 MIT press, 1993.
[&nbsp;<a href="bib/biblioCPC_bib.html#winskel1993formal">bib</a>&nbsp;]
</p>

<p><a name="goncharov2020implementing"></a>
Sergey Goncharov, Renato Neves, and Jos&eacute; Proen&ccedil;a.
 Implementing hybrid semantics: From functional to imperative.
 In <em>International Colloquium on Theoretical Aspects of
  Computing</em>, pages 262--282. Springer, 2020.
[&nbsp;<a href="bib/biblioCPC_bib.html#goncharov2020implementing">bib</a>&nbsp;]
</p>

<p><a name="lipovaca2011learn"></a>
Miran Lipovaca.
 <em>Learn you a haskell for great good!: a beginner's guide</em>.
 no starch press, 2011.
[&nbsp;<a href="bib/biblioCPC_bib.html#lipovaca2011learn">bib</a>&nbsp;]
</p>

<p><a name="wadler1995monads"></a>
Philip Wadler.
 Monads for functional programming.
 In <em>International School on Advanced Functional Programming</em>,
  pages 24--52. Springer, 1995.
[&nbsp;<a href="bib/biblioCPC_bib.html#wadler1995monads">bib</a>&nbsp;]
</p>
<!-- 
<hr><p><em>This file was generated by
<a href="http://www.lri.fr/~filliatr/bibtex2html/">bibtex2html</a> 1.99.</em></p> -->

## Supplementary bibliography

<p><a name="jacobs2017introduction"></a>
Bart Jacobs.
 <em>Introduction to coalgebra</em>, volume&nbsp;59.
 Cambridge University Press, 2017.
[&nbsp;<a href="bib/sup_bib.html#jacobs2017introduction">bib</a>&nbsp;]
</p>

<p><a name="ellison2012executable"></a>
Chucky Ellison and Grigore Rosu.
 An executable formal semantics of c with applications.
 <em>ACM SIGPLAN Notices</em>, 47(1):533--544, 2012.
[&nbsp;<a href="bib/sup_bib.html#ellison2012executable">bib</a>&nbsp;]
</p>
<!-- 
<hr><p><em>This file was generated by
 <a href="http://www.lri.fr/~filliatr/bibtex2html/">bibtex2html</a> 1.99.</em></p> -->


# Contact

The day and time for _appointments_ is Wednesday afternoon (Renato Neves) or Thursday morning (José Proença). Please
email us the day before if you wish to meet. If you prefer you
can also just send an email with your questions to [Renato Neves](mailto:nevrenato@di.uminho.pt) or to [José Proença](mailto:pro@isep.ipp.pt), or we can try to book an online meeting.
